The notion of "Italianness" has always been a paradox. Historically, Italy was defined as a collection of disparate regions unified in the late 19th century, a "nation in search of a state". Nowadays, Italy faces another crisis: the tension between the legal criteria for citizenship and the sociological reality of a new generation of Italians-the "Second Generation"-who identify themselves culturally as Italian yet are legally foreigners.
The following essay examines the current debate in respect to Italian citizenship and the proposition of Ius Scholae or citizenship via education through the lenses of Nationalism and the Social Construct of Race.
The thesis of this essay is that current Italian citizenship policies allow forms of institutionalized exclusion which essentially make "Italianness" a fixed biological status rather than a sociological one.
Overcoming this tension certainly involves a reorientation of the definition of the Italian nation in the direction of shared culture and participation, away from subjective myths of common descent.
In order for a full comprehension of this exclusion of immigrants in present-day Italy, we first have to go back to that theoretical distinction between nation and ethnie as seen in class. According to the course materials, an ethnie refers to a community bound by a common ancestry and cultural elements and historical memories, usually without having one unified political culture, whereas a nation requires a distinct public culture, collective laws, and perceived homeland.
Italian legislation usually mixes up these two notions, and it led to the current citizenship policies that are explicitly designed to "look backwards" since they follow the principle of ius sanguinis in order to keep ties with the descendants of the "Great Emigration" of Italians abroad.
This is deep in its sociological significance. The state created a legal framework privileging "latent Italians"-people who perhaps don't even speak Italian or who know nothing about contemporary culture-over immigrants born and raised in Italy. These laws treat citizenship as an asset to be preserved more than a social contract based on residence and shared values, reinforcing an ethno-cultural conception of "ancestral community" in which "blood" outweighs "culture".
The limitations of this ethno-centric model are evident in the case of the status of the children born to foreign parents in Italy (the Seocnd Generation, G2). According to the current law, these children are not citizens at birth and can only apply for the difficult pathway for acquiring Italian citizenship at age 18.
On this basis, under the "Nationalistic" perspective, we can distinguish that the G2 population satisfies both of the objective and subjective factors that define a nation: language, territory, shared history-through attending Italian schools, speaking Italian as their first language, and being socialized within the Italian territory. However, the state refuses to recognize those factors as enough for membership.
The proposal of Ius Scholae-or Ius Culturae-tries to overcome this situation by linking citizenship to school attendance, envisaging education as the central factor in socialization, turning an ethnic definition of nation into a civic one, considering that the completion of a cycle of Italian schooling should have the same value.
Every time this topic has been brought up in the Italian political landscape, it has been rejected, and this reveals a refusal of accepting the sociological reality that culture can be learned and it's not just limited to inheritance. When politicians argue that citizenship should be a "reward" for integration rather than a tool for integration, they are basically ignoring the fact that G2 children are already integrated and that they only lack the bureaucratic stamp to be considered officially Italians.
Why such resistance to recognizing G2 children as citizens? In order to give an answer to this question, we have to apply the theory of the Social Construction of Race. As we went over in the lectures, race is not a biological reality but a social category defined by physical traits and historical context. The defense of the ius sanguinis often stands by the construct of defending the tradition, but in reality, it functions as a defense of whiteness and specific ethno-cultural purity by excluding those who are non-European and non-white bodies of contemporary immigrants. It is a clear manifestation of "Institutional Racism", where laws and policies systematically disadvantage minority groups: when maintaining a system where an Argentine of remote Italian descent is more easily accepted than a Black child born in Milan, the state institutionalizes a racial hierarchy.
More than this, such dynamics also nurture a certain kind of "Quiet Discrimination". In refusing citizenship to G2 kids, their lives are condemned to one of suspicion, bureaucratic hurdles, no access to public sector employment, and threats of deportation. All this serves only to further "Other" these people, marking them out as perpetual guests in their own home.
A strong contradiction emerges in comparing the treatment of the Italian descendants abroad and the immigrants within Italy: the state encourages the re-acquisition of citizenship for those abroad-often of political utility-while it demands rigorous proofs of "integration" from the latter.
The debate on ius scholar highlights this hypocrisy: on one hand, five years are not enough to "feel" Italian but at the same time, the state assumes that a person born in Argentina and never visiting Italy has an innate Italian feeling only because of his bloodline. This would imply that for the Italian State, one can feel Italian only thanks to biological factors, while other objective factors like living and learning in Italy are viewed with suspicion when applied to non-ethnic Italians.
It seems like this resistance to Ius Scholae comes from a fear of changing the face of the nation: if "Italian" is no longer synonymous with a particular "phenotype," then the traditional conception of Ethnie vanishes.
The argument over who can become an Italian citizen is not just a legal one, but also one about what it means to be Italian. Through the lens of Nationalism and Race, it is evident that the current ius sanguinis system is a remnant of an ethno-nationalist past that does not fit with the country's multicultural present.
The current Italian government uses "blood" as a social construction of identity. This helps to maintain the historically white European demographic in positions of power and excludes the increasingly diverse population that constitutes the future of the country. The proposed Ius Scholae signifies the key sociological shift: recognizing that national identity is constructed through the process of socialization rather than through genetic factors.
In order to answer the thesis question: What constitutes a person as "Italian" today? Legally, the passport is the most important thing now, and it is mostly to do with ancestry. But from the sociological perspective, it is being a part of the public life and culture of the area. The state will continue this institutional exclusion, making a class of citizens in spirit who are aliens in law, until Italian law aligns with this sociological reality by means such as Ius Scholae. We will only have real national unity once we stop believing in the myth of the ethnie and start to believe in the reality of the civic nation.
